.. _3d:

3d: Dependent Data Descriptions for Verified Validation
=======================================================

.. note::

   The documentation from this page covers the EverParse/3d releases
   v2025.05.20 or later. Documentations for earlier versions may be
   found in the Git history.

EverParse/3d lets you write a data format description and
automatically produces efficient data validation code formally
verified for memory-safety (absence of buffer overruns), functional
correctness (validation is correct wrt. your data format) and security
(absence of double memory fetches.) A gentle overview of formal
verification is available in the `documentation of EverCrypt
<https://hacl-star.github.io/Overview.html#what-is-verified-software>`_;
EverParse provides similar formal guarantees except
secret-independence.

Summary
-------

1. Write your data format description in the 3d language, as
   ``MyFile1.3d``, ``MyFile2.3d``.

2. Give MyFile1.3d and MyFile2.3d to EverParse:

   * with the Windows binary package: ``everparse.cmd MyFile1.3d MyFile2.3d``

   * with the Linux binary package: ``everparse.sh MyFile1.3d MyFile2.3d``

   * with the source tree: ``bin/3d.exe --batch MyFile1.3d MyFile2.3d``

Then, EverParse/3d produces:

* ``MyFile1.fsti``, ``MyFile1.fst``: the verified F\* specification
  and Low\* implementation of parsers and validators for your data
  format from ``MyFile1.3d``, and similarly for ``MyFile2.3d``

* ``MyFile1.c``, ``MyFile1.h``: the verified C code generated from the verified
  F\* and Low\* files, and similarly for ``MyFile2.3d``

* ``MyFile1Wrapper.c``, ``MyFile1Wrapper.h``: an entrypoint API to call into the
  verified C code, and similarly for ``MyFile2.3d``

* ``EverParse.h``, ``EverParseEndianness.h``: various EverParse
  helpers for the implementation of verified validators, common to
  ``MyFile1.3d`` and ``MyFile2.3d``

3. Insert ``#include "MyFile1Wrapper.h"`` into any of your C
   compilation units that need to call a validator from
   ``MyFile1.3d``, and similarly for ``MyFile2.3d``.

Formal guarantees
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For each message type in the source data formats, the generated C code
provides a _validator_, a procedure to determine if a given input
array of bytes contains a valid representation of a message, with the
following properties:

* *Memory safety*: The validator is `memory safe <http://www.pl-enthusiast.net/2014/07/21/memory-safety/>`_, meaning it never
  accesses memory out of bounds, accesses memory at an incompatible
  type, uses memory after it has been freed, etc.

* *Arithmetic safety*: The validator has no integer overflows or underflows.

* *Double-fetch freedom*: The validator reads every byte in the input array at
  most once, defending against certain kinds of
  `time-of-check/time-of-use <https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/367.html>`_ bugs.

* *Write footprint*: The validator does not modify the input array,
  and only modifies memory as described by user-controlled imperative
  actions that are explicit in the specification.

* *No heap allocation*: The validator does not allocate any memory on
  the heap.

* *Functionally correct*: The validator accepts all input arrays that
  contain valid representations of the message according to its
  specification, rejecting all others.


Download and install
--------------------

We provide binary (x86_64 only) packages for Windows and Linux.

1. Download the binary package corresponding to your platform, from
   the `latest EverParse/3d release
   <https://github.com/project-everest/everparse/releases>`_.

2. Extract it (Windows: ``unzip``; Linux: ``tar xzf``) anywhere you
   like. No need to configure it anyhow.

Then, everything is contained in a ``everparse`` directory, whose
actual entrypoint executable is ``everparse.cmd`` (for Windows) or
``everparse.sh`` (for Linux.)

Binary packages already contain all dependencies required by
EverParse, such as F\*, KaRaMeL and z3, so no need to install anything
beforehand.

The Windows binary package contains a `binary snapshot of clang-format
<https://llvm.org/builds/>`_ to pretty-print the produced ``.c`` and
``.h`` files. On Linux, you may want to install clang-format (more
info at the `LLVM download page
<https://releases.llvm.org/download.html>`_), but this is optional.

The Windows binary package is fully native, in the sense that it does
not require any POSIX emulation layer such as Cygwin or WSL.

Run
---

On Windows: ``everparse.cmd`` [options] input_files

On Linux: ``everparse.sh`` [options] input_files

From the source tree: ``bin/3d.exe``. Caveat: in that case, no options
are toggled by default (not even ``--batch`` or ``--clang_format``)
and you need to provide all options by hand.
  
Options are treated from left to right, with higher priority on
right-most options. Thus, any ``--no_clang_format`` will override any
occurrence of ``--clang_format`` or ``--clang_format_executable`` to
its left, and vice-versa.

You can provide one or more ``input_files`` to EverParse. Then,
``EverParse.h`` and ``EverParseEndianness.h`` will be shared across
``.c`` and ``.h`` files produced for all the ``.3d`` files that you
provided.

.. note::

  EverParse input files must all bear the ``.3d`` file name extension,
  and their names must start with a capital letter.


Default mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^

In default mode, EverParse3d produces C code corresponding to
validators proven correct with respect to the 3d specification.

Options are treated from left to right:

* ``--odir output_directory_name``

  Tell EverParse to write all files to the directory
  ``output_directory_name``. This directory must already exist
  (EverParse will not create it.) The default is ``.`` (current
  directory)

* ``--batch``

  Verify the produced F\* ``.fst`` and ``.fsti`` files and generate C
  ``.c`` and ``.h`` files. This is toggled by default.

* ``--no_batch``

  Do not verify the produced F\* ``.fst`` and ``.fsti`` files or
  generate C ``.c`` and ``.h`` files.

* ``--clang_format``

  Call ``clang-format`` on extracted .c/.h files. This option
  automatically toggles ``--batch``.

  This is toggled by default on Windows, since the Windows binary
  package contains a copy of clang-format. On Linux, this is toggled
  by default only if ``clang-format`` is reachable through the
  ``PATH`` environment variable.

* ``--no_clang_format``

  Do not call clang-format on extracted .c/.h files.

* ``--clang_format_executable``

  Provide the path to clang-format if not reachable through ``PATH``
  (or to override the one provided in the Windows binary package.)
  This option automatically toggles ``--clang_format`` and
  ``--batch``.

* ``--clang_format_use_custom_config``

  With ``--clang_format``, skip copying the ``.clang-format`` file
  from the EverParse distribution, and assume that there is already an
  existing ``.clang-format``
  
* ``--cleanup``

  With ``--batch``, remove all produced intermediate files other than
  ``.c`` and ``.h` files (thus: ``.fst``, ``.fsti``, ``.checked``,
  ``.krml``)

* ``--no_cleanup``

  Keep all produced intermediate files. This is toggled by default.

* ``--skip_c_makefiles``

  Skip generating the default Makefiles produced by Karamel to compile
  the produced C code.

* ``--add_include <myinclude.h>``

  ``--add_include "myinclude.h"``

  Prepend each produced C file with a ``#include <myinclude.h>`` or a
  ``#include "myinclude.h"`` C preprocessor directive.

* ``--config myfile.config``

  Use the specified JSON file ``myfile.config`` to declare
  compile-time flags (see compile-time configuration in the 3D
  language reference.)

* ``--fstar path/to/fstar.exe``

  Allows to specify the location of the F* executable. The
  ``everparse.sh`` / ``everparse.cmd`` script in the EverParse binary
  package is already configured to use the F* executable provided in
  the package. Otherwise, the default is to use the ``fstar.exe``
  found from the ``PATH``.
  
* ``--input_stream buffer|extern|static``

  Specifies the format of validator input buffers:

  + With ``buffer`` (which is the default), a validator takes as
    argument a byte array and its length.

  + With ``extern``, a validator takes as argument a value of a
    user-defined ``EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE`` type, representing an
    input byte stream, for which the following functions need to be
    defined:

    .. code-block:: c

       extern BOOLEAN EverParseHas(
         EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T _extra_t,
         EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE x,
         uint64_t n
       );

    ``EverParseHas`` returns ``1`` if the input stream ``x`` has ``n``
    bytes available to read, ``0`` otherwise.

    .. code-block:: c

       extern uint8_t* EverParseRead(
         EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T _extra_t,
         EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE x,
         uint64_t n,
         uint8_t *dst
       );

    ``EverParseRead`` takes and reads ``n`` bytes from the input
    stream ``x``, possibly copying them into ``dst``, and returns a
    byte array containing the bytes read. There is no requirement that
    the function returns ``dst``, or even that a copy to ``dst`` is
    made.  `

    .. code-block:: c

       extern void EverParseSkip(
         EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T _extra_t,
         EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE x,
         uint64_t n
       );

    ``EverParseSkip`` advances the input stream ``x`` by ``n`` bytes
    without reading them.

    .. code-block:: c

       extern uint8_t* EverParsePeep(
         EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T _extra_t,
         EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE x,
         uint64_t n
       );

    ``EverParsePeep`` returns a pointer to a byte array that is part
    of the input stream ``x`` and points to its next ``n`` bytes, then
    advances the input stream by ``n``. If such operation is
    impossible, then returns ``NULL``. Such a pointer is returned by
    the ``field_ptr`` action (see "Atomic actions" in the 3d language
    reference), so it is the responsibility of the application to
    ensure double-fetch freedom on the contents of the returned field
    is preserved.

    .. code-block:: c

       extern uint64_t EverParseEmpty(
         EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T _extra_t,
         EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE x
       );

    ``EverParseEmpty`` skips to the end of the input stream ``x`` and
    returns the number of bytes so skipped, without reading them.

    In all such functions, ``EVERPARSE_EXTRA_T`` is a user-defined
    type for the context used for error handling (see "Error handling"
    in the 3d language reference.)
    
  + ``static`` is like ``extern`` except that the functions on
    ``EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE`` are declared ``static``.

  In any case, to compile the C code produced by EverParse, you need
  to add to the include path the subdirectory
  ``src/3d/prelude/<input_stream_format>`` of the EverParse binary
  package or repository; this directory contains the ``EverParse.h``
  corresponding to the input stream format given by ``--input_stream``

* ``--input_stream_include myinclude.h``

  With ``--input_stream``, defines the name of the C include file that
  provides definitions for ``EVERPARSE_INPUT_STREAM_BASE`` and its
  associated functions.

Alternate mode: generating a Makefile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, with ``--batch``, given a ``.3d`` specification, EverParse
produces ``.c`` and ``.h`` files by first producing ``.fsti`` and
``.fst`` files files containing verified F* specifications and
implementations of validators, and then calling F* and KaRaMeL on each
such file to verify and extract them to C. EverParse will issue all
such calls to F* and KaRaMeL sequentially.

Alternatively, with ``everparse.cmd --makefile gmake Test.3d`` (on
Windows; use ``./everparse.sh`` on Linux), instead of producing ``.c``
and ``.h`` files, EverParse will take ``Test.3d`` and all of the
modules it depends on, and produce a GNU Makefile containing all
recipes and rules to produce ``.c`` and ``.h`` files and all
intermediate files with proper dependencies so that the user can
leverage GNU Make parallelism for any rules that do not depend on one
another. Other build systems are supported with variations of the
``--makefile`` option, as stated below.

The produced Makefile will make use of three variables:

* ``EVERPARSE_CMD``: the command to run EverParse. This variable must
  contain the path and name of the EverParse executable, and any
  options (``--clang_format``, etc.) useful to produce .

* ``EVERPARSE_INPUT_DIR``: the path to the input files.

.. note::

  Currently, all ``.3d`` files must be located in the same input
  directory.

* ``EVERPARSE_OUTPUT_DIR``: the path to the output files. EverParse
  will append the ``--odir`` option appropriately.

* ``CC``: the path and name of the C compiler that will be used to
  compile the produced C files.

* ``CFLAGS``: options to provide to the C compiler to compile the
  produced C files.

The produced Makefile, by default called ``EverParse.Makefile``, is
meant to be included in the main ``Makefile`` of your project. On
Linux, such a typical main ``Makefile`` for use with GNU Make may look
like:

Also valid in Makefile generation mode are the following options:

* ``--clang_format``

  Add ``.clang-format`` as a dependency of generated ``.c`` and ``.h``
  files, and produce a rule to generate ``.clang-format``

* ``--clang_format_use_custom_config``

  Same as ``--clang_format``, but do not produce a rule to generate
  ``.clang-format``

.. literalinclude:: Sample.EverParse.Makefile
    :language: make

A fully commented version of that main ``Makefile`` is available `in
the EverParse repository
<https://github.com/project-everest/everparse/blob/master/src/3d/tests/modules/Makefile>`_.

EverParse supports the following command-line options relevant to this
mode:

* ``--makefile gmake``: produce a Makefile for use with GNU Make.

* ``--makefile nmake``: produce a Makefile for use with Microsoft
  NMAKE.

* ``--makefile_name my_file_name``: the name of the produced Makefile
  shall be ``my_file_name`` instead of the default
  ``EverParse.Makefile``.

* ``--skip_o_rules``: do not output rules that would produce ``.o``
  files by compiling ``.c`` files.

Alternate mode: hash checking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To speed up some scenarios where the user maintains a snapshot of the
generated .c and .h files to skip unnecessary verification time when
.3d files are not changed, EverParse provides an optional mechanism to
record the hash of .3d, .c and .h files and to compare them to skip
reverification and regeneration. This mechanism is disabled by
default, and has to be explicitly enabled using the ``--check_hashes``
option as described below.  **WARNING:** this mode will weaken
verification guarantees to the probability of hash collisions!

If enabled, then EverParse checks the hashes of the .3d and maybe .c
and .h files (depending on the variant, as described below) and fails
if hashes do not match; no verification or regeneration is performed
at all.

Hashes are computed and checked using the `EverCrypt
<https://hacl-star.github.io/HaclValeEverCrypt.html>`_ verified
cryptographic library, which is included in EverParse binary packages.

Options relevant to this mode:

* ``--save_hashes``: save the hashes of the contents of source .3d, .c
  and .h files into a .json file. This option can be added in default
  mode when generating .c and .h files.

* ``--check_hashes strong`` : checks the hashes of the contents of
  source .3d, .c and .h files, by reading the recorded hash from the
  .json file created by ``--save_hashes``.

* ``--check_hashes weak`` : checks the hashes of the contents of
  source .3d files only, by reading the recorded hash from the .json
  file created by ``--save_hashes``, leaving the option for the user
  to manually change the generated .c and .h files (**WARNING:** this
  will void all verification guarantees!)

* ``--check_hashes inplace``: same as ``--check_hashes weak``, but
  uses the hash recorded in the copyright header of the generated .c
  and .h files instead of the .json file. The hash is introduced by
  using the ``EVERPARSEHASHES`` keyword in the corresponding
  ``.copyright.txt`` used to prepend generated .c and .h files with
  copyright headers; see `Copyright headers
  <3d-lang.html#adding-copyright-notices-to-produced-c-h-files>`_ for
  more details.

* ``--check_inplace_hash MyFile.3d=MyFile.h``: same as
  ``--check_hashes inplace``, but instead manually specifies the pair
  of the source ``.3d`` file and the already-generated ``.h`` (or
  ``.c``) file in which to check the hash. This option can be
  specified several times to provide several such pairs to check.

Alternate mode: test case generation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Given a 3d specification, EverParse can now generate positive (resp.
negative) test cases. Internally, EverParse converts the 3d
specification into a
`SMT2 <https://stp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/smt-input-language.html>`_
theory, and then asks `Z3 <https://github.com/z3prover/z3>`_ for the following satisfiability question: is
there any sequence of bytes passing (resp.  failing) the parser
specification?

.. note::

   Test case generation currently does not work with probes that
   coerce pointer types or specialization for different pointer sizes.
   
The following options are mutually exclusive:

* ``--z3_test MyModule.my_parser``

  (requires ``MyModule.3d`` to be specified on the command line)
  produces positive and negative test cases for ``my_parser`` defined
  in ``MyModule.3d`` .

  This option produces the following results:

  + a series of binary files containing the contents of each test
    case. Each binary file is named as follows:

    ``witness.n.POS.i.validatorname.args.dat``

    where:

    - ``n`` is the test case number

    - ``POS`` (resp. ``NEG``) indicates a positive (resp. negative) test case

    - ``i`` is a *probe counter*: ``0`` corresponds to the input
      buffer passed to the validator; a positive value corresponds to
      the ``i``-th time a ``probe`` 3d construct is encountered. (If
      the 3d specification contains no ``probe`` construct, then only
      the ``0`` file will be created for each test case.)

      More precisely, when encountering a ``T *ptr probe
      ProbeFunction(length = ..., destination = ...)`` pointer field,
      the binary contents for that field in a test case is the
      big-endian representation of a positive 64-bit integer ``i`` so
      that the contents of the file with probe index ``i`` is meant to
      be passed to the validator for ``T``.
      
    - ``validatorname`` is the name of the validator function produced
      by EverParse. It has the shape ``ModuleValidateMyParser``

    - ``args`` is the sequence of the non-outparameter argument values
      passed to the validator, separated by ``.`` ; all of those
      argument values are integers.
    
  + a C test program, ``testcases.c``, that produces C definitions of
    the test cases, and calls to the validator with those test cases.

    A given test case is an array of *layers*; a layer is a byte array
    and its length. Layer 0 contains the byte array passed to the
    validator; layer of a positive index ``i`` contains the byte array
    passed to the validator corresponding to the ``i``-th time a
    ``probe`` pointer field is encountered.

  + with ``--batch`` (set by default when using the ``everparse.sh`` /
    ``everparse.bat`` script from the binary package), this option
    also compiles the C test program into ``test.exe`` and runs it to
    check whether the generated test cases are actually accepted or
    rejected by the verified validator implementations for the given
    3d parser specifications. Then, the test program prints on
    standard output the C definitions of the test cases.

    Use ``--no_batch`` to disable compilation of the C test program.

* ``--z3_diff_test MyModule1.my_parser1,MyModule2.my_parser2``
  
  (requires ``MyModule1.3d`` and ``MyModule2.3d`` to be specified on
  the command line) produces a set of test cases that are positive for
  ``my_parser1`` but negative for ``my_parser2``, and a set of test
  cases for the converse.

  The shape of the produced results is similar to those produced by
  ``--z3_test`` (see above), except that the test file name also
  contains the name of the second validator against which it is
  negative.

.. note::

   If Z3 produces no test cases and instead answers ``unsat`` both
   ways (``my_parser1`` and not ``my_parser2``; and ``my_parser2`` and
   not ``my_parser1``), then the two specifications are equivalent in
   terms of validation: they accept the exact same inputs. However,
   they do not necessarily write the same values into outparameters.
  
* ``--emit_smt_encoding``

  produces the SMT2 encoding corresponding to the ``.3d`` files passed
  as argument. Such encoding is printed on standard output.

* ``--test_checker MyModule.my_parser``

  (requires ``MyModule.3d`` to be specified on the command line)
  produces a test checker executable for the given parser,
  ``test.exe``. The test checker takes as arguments:

  + a binary file name containing the contents of the input buffer to
    be passed to the validator

  + the non-outparameter integer argument values to be passed to the
    validator

  The test checker executable returns exit code:

  + 0 if validation succeeds and consumes all input bytes
  + 1 if validation succeeds but the validator does not consume all input bytes
  + 2 if validation fails
  + 3 if the input file is larger than 4 GB, or if any system error
    occurs (file does not exist, read error, etc.)
    
  .. note::

     The test checker executable currently does not work with 3d
     specifications containing probes.

Options for ``--z3_test``
.........................

* ``--z3_test_mode pos``

  Only produces positive test cases

* ``--z3_test_mode neg``

  Only produces negative test cases

Options related to the C test program
.....................................

Unless explicitly specified otherwise, the following options can be
used with ``-z3_test`` or ``--z3_diff_test``:
  
* ``--z3_skip_testcases_c``

  Do not produce the C test program ``testcases.c``

* ``--z3_flight_name myflight``

  In the produced C test program and on its standard output, prefixes
  each C test case with ``witnessmyflight`` instead of ``witness``.

* ``--z3_skip_c_initializers``

  Do not use C99 designated initializers (struct initializers with
  field labels, of the form ``{ .field = value, ... }``) for test
  cases. This option is needed if the code is meant to be used with a
  C++ compiler in a mode older than C++20.

* ``-z3_use_ptr``

  In the produced C test program, use pointers rather than array
  indices for probe pointer field values. The architecture-specific
  binary representation of pointers will be used.

  .. note::

     This option currently only works with 64-bit pointers.
  
  This option does not affect the produced ``*.dat`` binary test
  files, which will still use array indices.

Options related to Z3 and SMT2
..............................

Unless explicitly specified otherwise, the following options can be
used with ``-z3_test`` or ``--z3_diff_test``:

* ``--z3_executable path/to/z3.exe``

  Specify a path to the Z3 executable that should be used to generate
  the test cases. This option does not affect the verification of the
  generated F* files. EverParse has been tested with Z3 4.13.3 for both
  test case generation and verification of the generated F* files.
  ``everparse.sh`` / ``everparse.bat`` already sets
  ``--z3_executable`` accordingly.

* ``--z3_options 'option1 ... optionK'``

  Pass command-line options to Z3 verbatim.

  Example: ``--z3_options -t:1000`` imposes a per-query timeout of
  ``1000`` milliseconds.

* ``--save_z3_transcript file.smt2``

  Saves the Z3 transcript (SMT2 commands sent to Z3, and response from
  Z3 as comments) to the specified ``file.smt2``

Branch coverage analysis
........................

Unless explicitly specified otherwise, the following options can be
used with ``-z3_test`` or ``--z3_diff_test``:
  
* ``--z3_branch_depth n``

  Ask z3 to generate test cases for all possible branches of a 3D
  specification up to depth ``n``, by depth-first search.  Branching
  points in a 3D specification are field constraints and ``casetype``;
  a *branch* is a sequence of choices performed at successive
  branching points. Default value for ``n`` is ``0`` to not perform
  branch coverage analysis.
  
* ``--z3_witnesses n``

  If ``--z3_test_mode`` is specified, then this option produces ``n``
  test cases for each branch. Otherwise, produce ``n`` positive and
  ``n`` negative tests for each branch. In both cases, ``n`` must be a
  positive integer.

  
Alternate mode: help and version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some options make EverParse do nothing other than show a help or
version message:

* ``--version``

  Print the version of EverParse/3d and exit (do not process any
  further options to the right, nor any files at all.)

* ``--help``

  Show the usage message and the status of some options given so far,
  and exit (do not process any further options to the right, nor any
  files at all.)

Language Reference
------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 4
   :caption: Contents:
 
   3d-lang
